Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the physicochemical principles of drugs. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Let us discuss the physicochemical principles of drugs.
Why do these properties matter to the anaesthetist?
Because the physical and chemical properties of a drug determine almost everything
about how it behaves: whether it can be dissolved and presented for injection,
how it is formulated, how readily it crosses membranes to reach its site of action,
how it distributes and is bound, and how it is eliminated.
Properties such as molecular size, lipid solubility, degree of ionisation,
the acid or base nature of the molecule, its chirality,
and its protein binding govern the onset, potency,
duration and side-effects of every agent we use.
Understanding them allows me to predict how a drug will behave,
to explain why agents are formulated as they are,
and to choose rationally between alternatives.
They are the foundation on which both pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics rest.
Let us begin with isomerism. What is it, and how is it classified?
Isomerism is the existence of molecules that share the same molecular formula — the
same atoms in the same numbers — but differ in their arrangement,
and which therefore may have different properties.
It is broadly divided into structural isomerism and stereoisomerism.
Structural, or constitutional, isomers differ in the way their atoms are connected
— the order of bonding. Stereoisomers have the same connectivity but differ in the
three-dimensional arrangement of their atoms in space.
Stereoisomerism is further divided into geometric isomerism,
arising from restricted rotation about a bond or ring, and optical isomerism,
arising from a chiral centre.
This classification matters because the type of isomerism determines how alike or
how different the isomers' clinical effects will be.
Give me examples of structural isomerism relevant to anaesthesia.
A classic pair is enflurane and isoflurane,
which share the molecular formula but differ in the arrangement of their atoms —
they are structural isomers with distinct pharmacological properties.
Another important example is tautomerism,
a dynamic form of structural isomerism in which the molecule interconverts between
two forms differing in the position of a hydrogen atom and a double bond.
Thiopental exhibits keto-enol tautomerism: in the alkaline,
water-soluble form in the vial it exists largely as one tautomer,
but at body pH it shifts towards the lipid-soluble enol form that crosses the
blood-brain barrier.
Midazolam shows a related pH-dependent ring-opening that gives it water solubility
in the acidic ampoule and lipid solubility at physiological pH.
Now stereoisomerism. Explain geometric isomerism with an example.
Geometric isomerism, also called cis-trans isomerism,
arises when rotation about a bond or within a ring is restricted,
so that substituent groups are fixed on the same side — cis — or opposite sides —
trans — of the molecule.
Because the groups are held in different spatial relationships,
the isomers can differ in activity.
The neuromuscular blocking drugs provide the key examples:
atracurium is a mixture of ten stereoisomers,
and cisatracurium is a single one of these, purified because it is more potent,
longer-acting and causes less histamine release than the parent mixture.
Mivacurium similarly exists as a mixture of isomers with differing activity.
So geometric and related stereoisomerism is directly exploited in drug development.
Explain optical isomerism and chirality.
Optical isomerism arises when a molecule contains a chiral centre — most often a
carbon atom bonded to four different groups — so that the molecule and its mirror
image are not superimposable, like left and right hands.
These non-superimposable mirror images are enantiomers.
They are identical in their ordinary physical and chemical properties — melting
point, solubility — and differ only in the direction in which they rotate
plane-polarised light and, crucially,
in their interaction with other chiral molecules.
Because the body's receptors, enzymes and transporters are themselves chiral,
the two enantiomers of a drug can differ markedly in affinity, efficacy,
kinetics and toxicity. Chirality is therefore one of the most important
physicochemical properties in pharmacology.
How are enantiomers named and described?
There are three systems. The direction in which the enantiomer rotates
plane-polarised light is denoted by a plus sign or the letter d for dextrorotatory,
and a minus sign or the letter l for laevorotatory;
this is an observed physical property.
The D and L convention relates the configuration to a reference molecule,
glyceraldehyde, and is used mainly for sugars and amino acids.
The most rigorous and now-preferred system is the R and S convention,
the Cahn-Ingold-Prelog system, which assigns configuration by ranking the priority
of the four groups around the chiral centre.
It is important to recognise that the direction of optical rotation cannot be
predicted from the R or S designation — they describe different things — so a drug
must be specified carefully.
Why does chirality matter clinically? Give examples.
Because the enantiomers can have quite different clinical profiles,
separating them can improve the therapeutic ratio.
Levobupivacaine is the single S-enantiomer of bupivacaine,
developed because it is less cardiotoxic than the racemic mixture while retaining
the local-anaesthetic effect. Ropivacaine is similarly a single enantiomer with a
better cardiovascular safety profile.
S-ketamine, esketamine, is more potent than the racemate and causes fewer emergence
phenomena. The older inhalational and sympathomimetic agents show large differences
between enantiomers.
The move from a racemic mixture to a single,
more favourable enantiomer is called a chiral switch,
and it is a recurring theme in modern drug development aimed at retaining benefit
while reducing harm.
What is a racemic mixture, and what are diastereomers?
A racemic mixture is an equal, fifty-fifty mixture of the two enantiomers of a
chiral drug; it is optically inactive overall because the rotations cancel.
Many drugs are still marketed as racemates — isoflurane, bupivacaine,
ketamine in its traditional form — because separating the enantiomers is costly and
not always worthwhile.
Diastereomers are stereoisomers that are not mirror images of one another,
arising when a molecule has more than one chiral centre; unlike enantiomers,
diastereomers differ in their ordinary physical properties and can be separated by
conventional means.
Atracurium, with multiple chiral centres,
is a mixture that includes diastereomers as well as enantiomers,
which is why cisatracurium could be isolated as a single, distinct species.
Move now to ionisation. What do we mean by weak acids and weak bases?
Most drugs are weak acids or weak bases,
meaning they partially ionise in solution depending on the pH.
A weak acid donates a proton to become a negatively charged, ionised form;
a weak base accepts a proton to become a positively charged, ionised form.
The two forms — ionised and un-ionised — exist in equilibrium.
The un-ionised form is lipid-soluble and crosses lipid membranes readily,
whereas the ionised form is water-soluble and largely trapped on whichever side of
a membrane it finds itself.
This division between a lipid-soluble and a water-soluble form, governed by pH,
is fundamental to absorption, distribution and excretion.
Define pKa and relate it to the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation.
The pKa of a drug is the pH at which exactly half of it is ionised and half
un-ionised — it is a property of the molecule.
The Henderson-Hasselbalch equation relates the ratio of ionised to un-ionised forms
to the difference between the ambient pH and the pKa.
The practical consequence is that for a weak acid,
lowering the pH below the pKa increases the un-ionised, lipid-soluble fraction,
while for a weak base the opposite holds.
Knowing a drug's pKa and the local pH therefore tells me how much of it is
available to cross membranes at any site — in the stomach, the plasma,
the renal tubule or an inflamed tissue.
How does ionisation affect a drug's behaviour in the body?
In several important ways. It governs absorption:
a weak acid such as aspirin is relatively un-ionised in the acidic stomach and can
be absorbed there.
It governs the activity of local anaesthetics: in infected,
acidic tissue a greater proportion of the basic local anaesthetic is ionised,
so less crosses the nerve membrane and the block is less effective.
It produces ion trapping, in which a drug crossing into a compartment of different
pH becomes ionised and accumulates — basic drugs trapped in the more acidic fetal
circulation or in acidic urine.
And it underlies the manipulation of excretion:
alkalinising the urine increases the ionised fraction of a weak acid such as
aspirin or phenobarbital, reducing reabsorption and enhancing its elimination.
Discuss lipid solubility and the partition coefficient.
Lipid solubility is a major determinant of how readily a drug crosses lipid
membranes, of its potency, and of how it distributes and is sequestered.
It is quantified by the partition coefficient,
the ratio of the drug's concentration between two immiscible phases at equilibrium
— commonly oil and water.
A high oil-water partition coefficient indicates a lipophilic drug that crosses
membranes readily, penetrates the brain quickly, and tends to accumulate in fat.
For the inhalational agents we use the blood-gas and oil-gas partition
coefficients: the blood-gas coefficient governs the speed of induction and recovery
— a low coefficient gives rapid onset — and the oil-gas coefficient correlates with
potency, the basis of the Meyer-Overton relationship between lipid solubility and
anaesthetic potency.
What is the significance of molecular size?
Molecular size influences how a drug crosses membranes and barriers and how it is
filtered and excreted. Small molecules diffuse across membranes and through pores
more readily than large ones.
At the glomerulus, small molecules are filtered freely whereas large molecules and
protein-bound drug are not. The placenta and the blood-brain barrier restrict large
molecules.
Molecular size is also relevant to the design of drugs intended to be confined to a
compartment — a large, polar molecule stays in the plasma.
So while lipid solubility and ionisation usually dominate,
molecular size is a genuine determinant, particularly at the extremes.
Explain the physicochemical basis of plasma protein binding.
Drugs bind reversibly to plasma proteins through physicochemical interactions —
ionic, hydrogen and van der Waals bonds and hydrophobic interactions.
Acidic drugs bind predominantly to albumin, the most abundant plasma protein,
which has a limited number of high-affinity sites;
basic drugs bind predominantly to alpha-one acid glycoprotein,
an acute-phase protein.
Only the free, unbound drug is pharmacologically active and able to cross membranes
and be eliminated, so binding acts as a reservoir and buffers the free
concentration.
The degree of binding depends on the drug's affinity and concentration and on the
amount of protein available, which is why hypoalbuminaemia,
or the rise in alpha-one acid glycoprotein in inflammation,
alters the free fraction of highly bound drugs.
Why are many drugs presented as salts?
Because the parent acid or base is often poorly water-soluble or unstable,
whereas a salt — a sodium or hydrochloride salt,
for instance — is water-soluble and can be formulated for injection and stored
stably.
Thiopental is presented as its sodium salt, which is water-soluble and alkaline;
many basic drugs are presented as hydrochloride or other acid salts.
Forming a salt does not change the intrinsic pharmacology of the active moiety but
enables a usable, stable preparation.
Once in solution and in the body, the salt dissociates and the equilibrium between
ionised and un-ionised drug is re-established according to the pH and pKa.
What is a prodrug, and why are esters used?
A prodrug is an inactive or less active compound that is converted in the body,
usually by metabolism, into the active drug.
Prodrugs are designed to overcome a physicochemical or kinetic limitation of the
active molecule — to improve solubility, absorption, stability,
or to target delivery.
Esterification is a common strategy:
making an ester can render a drug water-soluble for injection,
as with the phosphate ester fospropofol,
a water-soluble prodrug of propofol designed to avoid the lipid emulsion;
or it can create a substrate for rapid esterase hydrolysis,
giving an ultra-short action, as with remifentanil.
Codeine is, in effect, a prodrug requiring metabolism to morphine for its analgesic
effect. So the ester linkage is a versatile physicochemical tool.
Tell me about the additives in drug formulations.
Few injectable preparations are the pure active drug;
they contain excipients with specific physicochemical purposes.
Buffers and pH-adjusting agents keep the drug in its soluble, stable,
ionised form — the alkalinity of thiopental,
the acidity of local-anaesthetic solutions.
Antioxidants such as sodium metabisulphite prevent oxidative degradation.
Preservatives and antimicrobials retard microbial growth,
important in lipid emulsions such as propofol.
Emulsifying and solubilising agents allow insoluble drugs to be suspended — the egg
phosphatide and soya oil of the propofol emulsion.
Vasoconstrictors such as adrenaline are added to local anaesthetics.
And isotonic agents adjust tonicity.
Each additive can itself have clinical consequences — sulphite sensitivity,
the lipid load of an emulsion — so they are not inert.
Why is the pH of injected solutions adjusted, and what problems can the pH cause?
The pH is adjusted to keep the drug soluble and stable in the vial — often by
keeping it in its ionised form.
Thiopental is alkaline because the barbiturate is soluble and stable as its sodium
salt at high pH; local-anaesthetic solutions are acidic because the basic drug is
more soluble and stable in its ionised form at low pH.
The problem is that these non-physiological pH values cause difficulties on
injection: the acidity of local-anaesthetic solutions contributes to pain on
injection and slows onset, because only the un-ionised fraction present at the low
pH can cross the nerve, which is why some clinicians alkalinise the solution to
speed onset.
The alkalinity of thiopental makes it incompatible with acidic drugs and dangerous
if injected intra-arterially. So formulation pH is a compromise between stability
in the vial and behaviour in the body.
What is baricity, and why does it matter for spinal anaesthesia?
Baricity is the ratio of the density of a solution to the density of cerebrospinal
fluid.
A hyperbaric solution is denser than cerebrospinal fluid and will sink under
gravity; an isobaric solution has the same density and tends to stay where
deposited; a hypobaric solution is less dense and rises.
In spinal anaesthesia this is exploited to control the spread of the block:
a hyperbaric local-anaesthetic solution, made dense by the addition of glucose,
sinks to the dependent part of the subarachnoid space,
so that the position of the patient determines the level of block.
Baricity is therefore a physicochemical property deliberately engineered into the
preparation to control the clinical effect.
Explain the Meyer-Overton correlation and its significance.
The Meyer-Overton correlation is the observation that the potency of inhalational
anaesthetic agents correlates closely with their lipid solubility,
as measured by the oil-gas partition coefficient: the more lipid-soluble the agent,
the lower the concentration needed to produce anaesthesia.
Historically this suggested that anaesthesia resulted from a non-specific
physicochemical disturbance of the lipid membrane.
That unitary lipid theory is now regarded as too simple — anaesthesia is better
explained by actions on specific protein targets such as the GABA-A and other
channels, and there are exceptions to the correlation — but the relationship
remains a striking demonstration of how a physicochemical property,
lipid solubility, governs a pharmacological effect, potency.
How does lipid solubility influence the onset and offset of an agent's effect?
A lipophilic drug crosses the blood-brain barrier rapidly,
so the onset of central effect is fast — the rapid action of thiopental and
propofol reflects their high lipid solubility.
The same property means the drug distributes widely into tissues and accumulates in
fat, which influences the offset: recovery from a single dose is by redistribution
out of the brain, but the accumulated lipophilic drug is released slowly,
contributing to a prolonged terminal phase and to accumulation with repeated dosing.
For the inhalational agents, it is the blood-gas partition coefficient that governs
the speed of onset and offset, a less lipid-soluble,
low-coefficient agent such as desflurane giving the most rapid control.
So lipid solubility shapes both how fast a drug works and how it behaves over time.
Briefly, what determines the stability and shelf-life of a preparation?
Chemical stability depends on the drug's susceptibility to hydrolysis, oxidation,
photodegradation and changes with pH and temperature,
which is why preparations are formulated with antioxidants and buffers,
packaged to exclude light and air, sometimes provided as a dry powder to be
reconstituted, and given an expiry date and storage conditions.
Some drugs are stable for years; others,
such as reconstituted thiopental or drawn-up propofol,
are stable for only hours and must be discarded.
Recognising the limited stability of certain preparations is a practical safety
matter, both to ensure the drug is effective and to avoid the hazards of
degradation products or microbial growth.
Pull it together: how would you predict a new drug's behaviour from its
physicochemical properties?
I would consider each property in turn. Its lipid solubility would tell me how
readily it crosses membranes and the brain,
predicting a rapid onset and tissue accumulation if high.
Its pKa and acid-base nature, with the local pH,
would tell me the ionised fraction at each site, predicting absorption,
ion trapping and the effect of pH manipulation on excretion.
Its molecular size would indicate filtration and barrier penetration.
Its protein binding would indicate the free,
active fraction and its sensitivity to changes in plasma proteins.
Its chirality would alert me to differences between enantiomers.
And its formulation — salt, prodrug, additives, pH,
baricity — would explain how it is presented and any consequences of that.
From these I can reason out, rather than merely memorise,
how the drug is likely to behave.
Relate solubility and dissolution to drug absorption and bioavailability.
For a drug to be absorbed it must first dissolve,
so solubility and the rate of dissolution can be the rate-limiting step for an
orally administered solid. A poorly soluble drug,
or one given as a slowly dissolving formulation,
is absorbed slowly and incompletely.
Bioavailability — the fraction of an administered dose that reaches the systemic
circulation in active form — depends on this dissolution and absorption together
with first-pass metabolism.
By definition an intravenous dose has a bioavailability of one,
while oral bioavailability is reduced by incomplete absorption and by pre-systemic
metabolism.
So the physicochemical properties of solubility and dissolution,
with lipid solubility and ionisation governing membrane crossing,
between them determine how much of an oral dose actually becomes available to act.
State Fick's law of diffusion and its physicochemical determinants.
Fick's law states that the rate of diffusion of a substance across a membrane is
proportional to the membrane's surface area and the concentration gradient across
it, and inversely proportional to the membrane thickness,
with a constant that incorporates the diffusing substance's properties.
Those properties are physicochemical:
the diffusion is faster for small molecules and, across a lipid membrane,
for lipid-soluble, un-ionised molecules.
So the same factors recur — molecular size,
lipid solubility and degree of ionisation — now expressed as the determinants of
diffusion rate.
Fick's law governs the movement of drugs across every membrane and barrier,
the uptake of inhalational agents across the alveolus, and gas exchange itself.
Work through the effect of urinary pH on the excretion of a weak base.
Take a weak base such as amfetamine or, in overdose, a basic drug.
In acidic urine the weak base accepts a proton and becomes ionised; the ionised,
water-soluble form cannot diffuse back across the tubular epithelium and is
therefore trapped in the tubular fluid and excreted — so acidifying the urine
enhances the elimination of a weak base.
The converse holds for a weak acid such as aspirin or phenobarbital:
alkalinising the urine ionises and traps it, enhancing its excretion,
which is exploited in salicylate and phenobarbital poisoning.
This is the principle of ion trapping applied to the renal tubule,
and it follows directly from the Henderson-Hasselbalch relationship between pH,
pKa and the ionised fraction.
Give some further examples of clinically important chirality,
including a cautionary one.
Warfarin is a racemate whose S-enantiomer is several times more potent and is
metabolised by a different pathway from the R-form,
which is relevant to its interactions. Propranolol's beta-blocking activity resides
almost entirely in one enantiomer.
The cautionary example is thalidomide,
a racemate in which the two enantiomers were reported to have very different
effects, and which moreover interconvert in the body,
a tragic illustration of why enantiomers cannot be assumed equivalent.
The terms eutomer and distomer denote the more and less active enantiomers,
and their ratio, the eudismic ratio,
expresses how stereoselective a drug's action is.
These examples reinforce that chirality is a first-order consideration,
not a detail.
What is saturated vapour pressure, and why does it matter to us?
The saturated vapour pressure is the pressure exerted by the vapour of a volatile
liquid in equilibrium with its liquid phase in a closed container at a given
temperature. It is a physicochemical property of the agent and depends on
temperature, rising as temperature rises.
It matters because it determines the maximum concentration of a volatile
anaesthetic that a vaporiser can deliver and is the basis of vaporiser design:
agents with a high saturated vapour pressure produce high vapour concentrations,
which is why vaporisers are agent-specific and temperature-compensated.
Desflurane's very high saturated vapour pressure,
with a boiling point near room temperature,
is precisely why it requires a specially heated,
pressurised vaporiser rather than a conventional one.
Explain boiling point and latent heat of vaporisation in this context.
The boiling point is the temperature at which the saturated vapour pressure equals
atmospheric pressure and the liquid boils;
desflurane's is close to room temperature,
which makes its delivery by a conventional vaporiser impractical.
The latent heat of vaporisation is the energy required to convert liquid to vapour
without a change in temperature; as a volatile agent vaporises it draws this heat
from its surroundings and the liquid cools,
which would reduce the saturated vapour pressure and the output.
Conventional vaporisers are therefore designed with temperature compensation and
heat-conducting materials to offset this cooling,
while the desflurane vaporiser actively heats the agent.
These are direct physicochemical determinants of how our vaporisers must be
engineered.
Define critical temperature and critical pressure, with a gas example.
The critical temperature is the temperature above which a substance cannot be
liquefied by pressure alone, however great;
the critical pressure is the pressure required to liquefy it at its critical
temperature. They matter for the storage of our gases.
Oxygen has a critical temperature far below room temperature,
so it cannot be liquefied at room temperature and is stored as a compressed gas,
or as a liquid only when kept very cold in a vacuum-insulated vessel.
Nitrous oxide has a critical temperature above room temperature,
so it can be liquefied by pressure and is stored as a liquid in its cylinder,
which is why the cylinder pressure does not fall in proportion to the contents
until the liquid is exhausted.
These are physicochemical properties with direct practical consequences.
How does molecular size influence the choice between related drugs,
for instance the heparins?
Molecular size determines what crosses barriers and how a drug is handled.
Unfractionated heparin is a large, heterogeneous molecule,
whereas the low-molecular-weight heparins are smaller fragments;
the smaller size gives the low-molecular-weight heparins a more predictable
response, longer action and predominantly anti-factor-ten-a activity,
and renal rather than mixed clearance.
Neither crosses the placenta appreciably because of size,
making them safe anticoagulants in pregnancy, unlike warfarin.
Size similarly governs whether a molecule is filtered at the glomerulus or crosses
the blood-brain barrier.
So a difference in molecular size translates into real differences in pharmacology
and clinical use between otherwise related agents.
What types of bond underlie reversible drug-receptor interaction?
Most drug-receptor interactions are reversible and rely on relatively weak,
non-covalent forces: ionic or electrostatic bonds between charged groups,
hydrogen bonds, van der Waals forces, and hydrophobic interactions.
Because these are weak and reversible,
the drug associates and dissociates from the receptor, giving a graded,
reversible effect dependent on concentration.
A few drugs form strong covalent bonds,
producing effectively irreversible binding — aspirin acetylating cyclo-oxygenase,
or the organophosphates binding cholinesterase — so that recovery requires
synthesis of new protein.
The nature of the bonding therefore determines whether an effect is readily
reversible or long-lasting, which is a physicochemical determinant of duration of
action.
Why does the tonicity and osmolality of a preparation matter?
The osmolality of an injected or infused solution affects its compatibility with
blood and tissues.
A markedly hypertonic solution can damage the vein and cause thrombophlebitis or,
if extravasated, tissue injury, and some concentrated preparations must be given
into a central vein or well diluted. A hypotonic solution can cause haemolysis.
Intravenous fluids are formulated with attention to tonicity for this reason,
and the osmolality of additives contributes to the irritancy of some drug
preparations. So tonicity is a physicochemical property of the preparation that
bears on how and where it can safely be given.
Why is propofol formulated as a lipid emulsion, and what follows from that?
Propofol is a phenol, an oil at room temperature and almost insoluble in water,
so it cannot simply be dissolved for injection.
It is therefore formulated as an oil-in-water emulsion, with soya-bean oil,
purified egg phosphatide as emulsifier and glycerol,
the same kind of emulsion as parenteral nutrition.
Several consequences follow: the emulsion supports microbial growth,
so preparations contain a retardant such as disodium edetate or metabisulphite and
drawn-up drug must be used promptly;
it provides a lipid calorie load relevant in prolonged infusion;
it causes pain on injection; and it raises questions of egg or soya allergy,
though true reactions are rare.
The formulation is thus a direct physicochemical solution to the drug's
insolubility, with its own clinical implications.
Summarise the partition coefficients we use and what each tells us.
The oil-water partition coefficient is a general index of lipid solubility,
predicting membrane crossing, brain penetration and fat accumulation.
For the inhalational agents two further coefficients are central.
The blood-gas partition coefficient describes how the agent distributes between
blood and the alveolar gas; a low coefficient means the blood is quickly saturated,
so the alveolar and brain partial pressures rise rapidly,
giving fast onset and offset — desflurane and nitrous oxide.
The oil-gas partition coefficient describes lipid solubility and correlates with
potency through the Meyer-Overton relationship;
a high coefficient means a potent agent with a low minimum alveolar concentration.
So between them these coefficients predict the speed and the potency of a volatile
agent.
Distinguish a prodrug from a soft drug.
A prodrug is an inactive precursor that is metabolised into the active drug — the
activation lies downstream of administration,
as with codeine to morphine or parecoxib to valdecoxib.
A soft drug is the opposite idea: an active drug deliberately designed to be
metabolised rapidly and predictably to an inactive product,
so that its action is brief and controllable and it does not accumulate.
Remifentanil and esmolol are essentially soft drugs,
designed with an ester linkage for rapid esterase hydrolysis to give an
ultra-short, organ-independent offset. Both concepts use metabolism by design — the
prodrug to switch the drug on, the soft drug to switch it off.
What physicochemical interactions occur between volatile agents and soda lime?
Volatile agents come into contact with the carbon-dioxide absorbent in a circle
system, and physicochemical interactions can occur, particularly with dry absorbent.
Sevoflurane can be degraded by strong bases in the absorbent to compound A,
a nephrotoxin in animal studies, a concern that influenced low-flow practice and
absorbent composition.
Volatile agents, especially when the absorbent is desiccated,
can also be degraded to carbon monoxide, a recognised hazard.
These concerns prompted the development of absorbents free of the strong bases
sodium and potassium hydroxide, which are far less reactive.
So the interaction between an agent and the absorbent is a physicochemical matter
with direct safety implications, addressed by changing the chemistry of the
absorbent.
What is a eutectic mixture, and give an anaesthetic example.
A eutectic mixture is a combination of two solids that,
when mixed in a particular proportion,
has a lower melting point than either component alone — low enough,
in the relevant case, to be liquid at room temperature.
The anaesthetic example is the eutectic mixture of local anaesthetics,
lidocaine and prilocaine in equal proportion,
which forms an oil that can be emulsified into a cream.
This allows a high concentration of local anaesthetic in the un-ionised,
absorbable form to be applied to intact skin and to penetrate it,
producing topical anaesthesia for cannulation.
It is a neat exploitation of a physicochemical phenomenon — melting-point
depression — to solve the practical problem of anaesthetising skin.
State Henry's law and its relevance to the inhalational agents.
Henry's law states that, at a constant temperature,
the amount of a gas dissolved in a liquid is proportional to the partial pressure
of that gas above the liquid.
It governs the uptake of inhalational agents and gases into blood:
the partial pressure, not the concentration, drives diffusion and equilibration,
and at equilibrium the partial pressures in alveolus, blood and brain are equal,
even though the concentrations differ according to solubility.
The solubility itself, expressed by the blood-gas partition coefficient,
determines how much dissolves for a given partial pressure and hence the speed of
equilibration.
Henry's law also explains the temperature dependence of gas solubility,
relevant to blood-gas measurement and to the formation of bubbles when solubility
falls.
Explain the physicochemical basis of adsorption and where it is used.
Adsorption is the adherence of molecules to the surface of a solid,
distinct from absorption into its bulk,
and it depends on surface area and the affinity between the adsorbent and the
molecule.
Activated charcoal, with an enormous surface area,
adsorbs many drugs and toxins and is used in poisoning to bind drug in the gut and
prevent absorption, and in repeated doses to interrupt enterohepatic recirculation;
it is ineffective for small, polar molecules such as lithium or iron that it does
not bind well.
Charcoal is also used in filters to adsorb volatile anaesthetic agents.
So adsorption is a surface physicochemical process turned to therapeutic and
practical use.
How do additives such as adrenaline alter the action of a local anaesthetic?
Adding a vasoconstrictor such as adrenaline, or felypressin,
to a local-anaesthetic solution causes local vasoconstriction,
which reduces the rate at which the drug is carried away from the site.
The consequences are a prolonged duration of block,
a reduced peak plasma concentration and therefore a greater margin of safety and a
higher permissible dose, and a more intense block,
as well as reduced surgical bleeding.
The trade-offs are that the acidity of the adrenaline-containing solution can slow
onset and increase pain on injection,
that systemic absorption of the adrenaline has cardiovascular effects,
and that vasoconstrictors are avoided where end-arterial supply could be
compromised.
So a simple additive modifies the kinetics and the clinical performance of the
local anaesthetic.
How does temperature influence the physicochemical behaviour of drugs and gases?
Temperature affects several properties at once.
It raises the saturated vapour pressure of volatile agents,
increasing vaporiser output unless this is compensated.
It alters gas solubility — by Henry's law, gases are less soluble in warm liquids,
so a patient's temperature and the temperature of a blood sample affect
dissolved-gas content and blood-gas measurement,
which is corrected to the patient's actual temperature.
It changes reaction and degradation rates,
so drugs are stored cool to prolong stability.
It affects the rate of spontaneous,
temperature-dependent breakdown such as Hofmann degradation,
which slows when the patient is hypothermic, prolonging the action of atracurium.
And it changes membrane fluidity and diffusion.
So temperature is a pervasive physicochemical variable that I would keep in mind
for vaporiser performance, blood-gas interpretation,
drug storage and the behaviour of temperature-sensitive agents.
Thank you. A clear and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Isomerism divides into structural (different connectivity, e.g.
enflurane/isoflurane, thiopental tautomerism) and stereoisomerism (same
connectivity, different 3-D arrangement — geometric and optical).
Second, Enantiomers are non-superimposable mirror images,
identical physically but differing at chiral receptors — hence the chiral switch to
single enantiomers such as levobupivacaine and esketamine for a better therapeutic
ratio.
Third, Only the un-ionised form crosses membranes;
pKa and local pH (Henderson-Hasselbalch) govern absorption, ion trapping,
local-anaesthetic action in acidic tissue, and pH-manipulated excretion.
Fourth, Lipid solubility, quantified by the partition coefficient,
governs membrane crossing, onset, tissue accumulation and — via Meyer-Overton — the
potency of inhalational agents.
Fifth, Formulation (salts, esters/prodrugs, additives, adjusted pH,
baricity) is engineered from physicochemistry to make drugs soluble,
stable and clinically controllable, and each additive can have its own effects.
Thank you. That concludes the station.